we just spent half hour talking about
this and I hardly ever talk about it why
is that wrong I didn't say it was wrong
okay I'm NE the grass Tyson world
renowned astrophysicist turn TV host
he's a man with the answers to the
toughest questions on the planet and of
course bestselling author in the last 50
years we've increased life expectancy 20
years there will be a time where Homo
sapiens have achieved escape velocity
from Death that generation will never
die unless you're hit by a bus that
brings to you the question if you could
live forever would
you how different the world would be
what are the things that you are most
concerned about with the direction of
travel of the human race a lot of
things so there's some delusional Force
operating on people's understanding of
the world in which they live if you post
an opinion on anything it gets attacked
did you see what happened with Neil
degrass Tyson he tweeted something that
many people took great offense to part
of what it is to be a scientist is is
figure out all the ways you could bias
yourself and remove them as far as
possible don't let it interfere with
objective truths but what's the personal
toll on you I don't know why he tweeted
that stupid and awful he's just a weird
Twitter
lunatic is
a how long can I keep talking
about but before this episode starts I
have a small favor to ask from you 2
months ago 74% of people that watched
this channel didn't subscribe we're now
down to
69% my goal is 50% so if you've ever
liked any of the videos we've posted if
you like this channel can you do me a
quick favor and hit the Subscribe button
it helps this channel more than you know
and the bigger the channel gets as
you've seen the bigger the guests get
thank you and enjoy this episode
[Music]
Neil I have always believed that to
fully understand a person you have to
understand their origin story maybe
that's a a similar sort of analogy for
the universe so the place I wanted to
start with you is by understanding the
most important context from your
earliest years that are responsible for
the person that is sat in front of me
today wow this is a very Marvel Comics
of you like what's the origin story of
Superman Batman Spider-Man uh
your question is very well-placed
because everyone has been touched by
some series of events unfortunately some
for some people traumatic events but for
all people some series of events that
shaped who they are and I'd like to say
that there was a series of events that
planted the seeds of who I would become
but I I wouldn't say that they were
responsible I mean it requires a lot of
continual investment of time energy and
focus to shape a career rather than say
oh it happened then and i' just been
coasting ever since no that's not how
that works
so I grew up in the
Bronx and in New York City surely as is
true in London you don't have a
relationship with the night sky in a
busy City you at least in certainly in
New York City there were tall buildings
if you look up to see the sky there's a
building in the way there's light
pollution there's and back then there
was air
pollution
so since no one has a relationship with
with the night sky then one can ask what
is your access to it of course it's our
local planetarium the Hayden
Planetarium and I my family my parents
my brother and sister there was a
tactical strategic thing my parents did
I I didn't know it at the time but every
weekend or every other weekend we went
places we were exposed to all manner of
things that talented adults
do Beyond just the doctor lawyer you
know engineer Beyond those standard
professions so first it was entertaining
but it also meant we had
exposure to other ways of thinking about
what you might do with your life one of
those trips when I was 9 years old was
to the Hayden
Planetarium and I was Star
Struck you sit in a big chair and the
lights dim and the stars come out more
stars than you can
count and I thought it was a hoax I said
aren't that many stars I've seen the
night sky from the Bronx you're lying to
me and only later would I learn upon
going deep into the rural areas of the
country we have relatives in the
Caribbean we visited there I'd see the
night sky as nature
intended and to this day when I have
access to Great telescopes on
mountaintops and I look up at the
crystall and clear night skies I still
say to myself oh that is so beautiful it
reminds me of the haen
planetarian so it's a uh I know that's
kind of a sad commentary on what it is
to grow up in a city but
it's I feel like the universe chose me
and since I was nine years old onward I
have committed my life to learning more
and more about the universe and that
that's the the most important seed that
was planted sirel and Sunita is that
your parents name sir is my father and
Sunita is my mother correct what was the
influence that they individually had on
you from the from almost vicariously
learning from them but also the direct
influence they had on you
they were a moral influence a cultural
influence and I will add not that you
explicitly ask this but I think it fits
right in this
moment um consider the period the
1960s you could go one of two ways if
you're an angry black man it's like you
can raise your
fist and threaten
violence as a retaliation of the
violence against you or you can find
some other way
that doesn't involve violence that
involves some kind of Peace some kind of
understanding and my father and while he
grew up in the 30s and 40s he served in
a segregated Army okay so this stuff he
lived through and while I have my own
stories none of them compare to his
average story yet at the end of the day
he was never bitter I remembered him
saying when you look at the images of
Angry white people screaming at black
children entering a school who are
protected by the National Guard because
an edict had to be delivered to grant
them access to
education he would
say they simply don't know any
better they were raised that
way you you want to hate
them
and my father never
hated
never so I go through life and at least
several times a week every week of my
life growing up I have stories today
they would call them
microaggressions but then it was just
same different day but I never got
bitter because you asked what influence
did they have on me it was the
non-bitter influence you
say that's they don't know any better
they think they're doing the right
thing maybe we can make a difference
going forward I saw the emotion in your
face when you talked about your father
yeah
it's I think we need that today
the
world I I reached a point where
okay how long can I keep talking
about the
universe and not bring it down to
earth not bring some science principles
to people's thinkings they want to to
tribalize they want to
hate they want to
choose they want to create
laws to restrict your freedoms Just
Because of Who You worship or don't
worship or who you sleep with or what
you look like or what you know how
reflective to light your skin color is
right what side of a Line in the Sand
you were born on
I like invoking an alien Trope aliens
they don't know anything about us they
just see this beautiful planet with
water on it and continents and clouds
and they visit and they say oh this is
cool oh there's this one species that's
everywhere oh they're very successful
they are humans and Homo sapiens and
that's cool and then they get a little
closer look and they say oh my gosh what
are they there's a war over here why oh
because there's some resource on this
side that's not over there and they want
it there's a coastline there's oil
there's this there's a elements in a
mine they they they they worship a
different God they'll look at the
violence and hatred that we commit upon
each other and they'll run back home and
tell their fellow alien
Brethren there's no sign of intelligent
life on
Earth
so anyhow so I've I've yeah my head has
been in the stars but my feet have been
on Earth my entire
life why why why does that connect so
deeply because it's so obvious it
connects so deeply with you is that
linked to what the resilience to
bitterness that your father demonstrated
when he was abused and was attacked with
racial abuse is that is that the the
reason why it's so linked so closely to
your heart I I I don't know
um he didn't he didn't burden us with
his stories unless we asked or unless it
came up in a moment was it wasn't that
way it was I saw his Integrity in the
face of what was going on in the world
and
it's you can a person could be a mentor
even if they don't say
anything because you can observe them
observe their
conduct their their behavior their how
they respond to adversity do they fight
back do they want to commit
violence do they want to have a
conversation to explore the
differences you know I I am I'm a my
mother's from Nigeria my dad's from
England so I'm of I guess dual ethnicity
or whatever the politically correct term
is now it's called human okay I'm human
it's called just say it repeat after
what race are you you're the human race
I'm the human race you you just spent 10
seconds telling me how anthropologists
liked to divide up the world and force
us to then agree with their
categories line everybody up from Ghost
white to Cole black and you'll have a
human being of every single skin color
in between okay oh did you happen to be
born over there so you're a
human tell me what mixture you are I
don't give a rat's ass you're a human
being sitting across the table from me
now continue sorry sorry it's your
podcast it's fine I don't mind I don't
mean to jump all in your face it's fine
it's fine I'm I'm fine with it um and i'
I've come to learn about what it was to
be black in the
1960s 7s from my guest and it's helped
me to understand my mother better
because I have to I have my mother
didn't react like your father did you
talked about mother was Nigerian
Nigerian she came to the UK we lived in
an allh area she didn't react like your
father did and so it skewed my
perspective on on race relations but
then from doing this podcast and meeting
people like you hearing some of those
very specific stories of abuse I almost
can't believe it and now I have this
huge amount of empathy for my mother
because I've sat here with the guests
and one of the stories I heard you tell
was about your father competing in
athletics and how people would scream
the nword at him while he was running oh
yeah so that this was for me one of the
most in
ightful lessons that I got from all the
stories from him yes so he uh he was a
an athlete actually world class track uh
that's its own story because he he was
uh kind of muscular all right certainly
in his day not Charles Atlas muscular
but relative to other kids in his class
in high school he was muscular and they
were in their gym class and you line up
and getting ready for the next
all right there was gymnastics and then
there was like track and field so they
had the track unit and the gym teacher
pointed to my
father on the line and said we're about
to do the running unit and just so you
know um do you see sirel Tyson over
there then turns he says he has the kind
of body that would not make a good
runner and he said to
himself no one is going to tell me what
I can't do in this
world and he started
running and he became world class and at
one point he had the fifth fastest time
in the world in his special event so
that was that's an important lesson
career lesson why are there people
running around telling you what you
can't accomplish in in a free
Society I can get it if we're not a free
Society but why should anyone tell you
what you can't or shouldn't do
so that was lesson number one for
me but then his best friend also a
runner Johnny Johnson was his
name uh there's a race Johnny Johnson is
running around on the last turn of the
track and there's a runner from the New
York Athletic Club several Paces behind
him the coach of that Runner goes up the
side of the track and screams to his
Runner as he points to Johnny Johnson
ahead of him catch
that Johnny Johnson overheard this
okay and all Johnny Johnson said to
himself was this is one he ain't going
to catch just and increase the
distance okay so so that comment from
the
coach could have done one of two things
it could have demotivated you because
then you wallow in the racism of the
world or it could motivate you to
succeed ever since I heard that
story every racist encounter I have ever
had simply motivates me to succeed all
the
more
period And I see that throughout your
story as you go through
you know College University um and you
go into your postgrad there's moments
over and over again where people or
circumstance encourage you away from
what's clearly your passion the thing
you're clearly pursuing yeah people
didn't yeah and again this is not the
kind of racism that the 1950s or 40s you
know I wasn't lynched you know so so
again I don't want to claim equal I'm
trauma to what earlier Generations had
experienced but you can get let's call
it institu racism even racism I'm
talking about people trying to put you
off your passion telling you it's not
calling that racism what I'm saying is
they see that I'm athletic I was
athletic most of my life and they can't
wrap their head around me being
something other than an athlete that
they watch on
television when I say well I actually
like astrophysics but you're so good at
this other sport no I want to be in the
physics Club no we we need you on the
the basketball team
and they think they're doing me a favor
they think they're saying nice things to
me but every one of those is a force
operating against my
ambitions and so in a way just that my
skin color in my life's Arc was a path
of most resistance compared to where I
wanted to land and by the way I don't
you we're we we just spent a half hour
talking about this and I hardly ever
talk about it I don't talk about because
I don't you know I don't
need to maybe if it's a counseling
session but I'm perfectly fine I'm a
happy guy happily married got two kids
and uh I hardly ever talk about skin
color
because I I want to make it irrelevant
as quickly as I possibly can in every
context I'm possibly in so if you're
going to invite me to give a public talk
in February black history month I will
decline that invitation if you only
think of me as a black
scientist then I have failed as a
scientist
period
period uh you want me to oh what
do and you know how I realize this okay
so I will tell you the moment after
which I was a different person
interacting with the public okay I'm in
graduate school there's an explosion on
the Sun
and the Press it's over the wires press
hears about this so they want to get a
comment on it an explosion on the Sun so
they called Columbia the department of
astronomy and they're looking for some
it was lunchtime they were all out to
lunch I'm a I'm a grad I'm a doctoral
candidate I'm there for my PhD and so
the department uh admin is going through
the the roster and they get to me say
Neil no one is here can you take this
call so I said sure and they said hello
who are you I'm Neil degrass Tyson
doctoral candidate in astrophysics they
say you know there's an explosion on the
sun should we be worried I oh it's a
solar flare they happen with some
frequency it's a wave of particles
coming towards Earth and they said you
mean the Earth is fine I said the Earth
is fine and they said can you tell us
that on
camera I um sure okay we'll send up a
limo to pick you up in a half hour and
so the whole conversation there it was
and it was pre-taped I get home I put on
the TV and I watched this
interview and I had an outof body
experience I just witnessed something
I've never seen before in my life and
you know what that
was it was the
news interviewing a black person me
who was not an Entertainer or athlete
okay interviewing a black
person for
expertise that had nothing to do with
being
black the interview didn't say at the
end well how do black people feel about
solar flares oh does this AFF affect
dark skin differently none of that it
was will Earth be safe and he's getting
that expertise from a black person I
never seen seen that then I thought well
is it just cuz I'm on TV and I'm a
little more aware so I watched for the
next two years every time there was a
black person brought onto the news for
expertise it was someone who's a a
member of Congress representing a
community and they want Enterprise zones
for the economics there was someone who
was worried about the poverty in the
inner
city
never had an audience seen a black
person as an expert
oh that they would have attorneys but
it's talking about a court case about a
black person would they ever being a
black attorney to talk about a court
case about a white person
no and I said to myself
that is the
answer that's how I we turn an entire
world of people who think black people
are just dumb and stupid lazy shiftless
and all they can do is shine my shoes
and entertain me and sing and be the
athlete on the field if there was an
ever a force to change that it's not
people telling them they should think
differently it's me being visible in a
way where they have no other choice but
to say oh my gosh this person knows more
about this subject than I do and he has
dark skin so the next time they see a
homeless black person they're not saying
oh black people are just like they have
to confront the fact that they just saw
a black person tell them that Earth was
safe so it's just quite simple the next
time you're driving your car and
somebody comes up with a squeegee to
wash your window at the red light and
begs for money and if that person is
black maybe you'll think
twice about the causes and effects of
poverty of the forces that operate that
discriminate against one community of
people versus another
so ever since that moment I have
declined
interviews that want me because I'm
black and even in this interview I'm not
entirely comfortable spending a half
hour talking about it because it it
turns this interview into something
about me being black which then is
someone hears or hears me for the first
time oh let's get him he has all these
stories about being black let's get him
to talk to this group about in this
racial uh in this race conference no I
will decline that
invitation so let's talk about um a
separate Point what advice would you
give me on how you pursue the thing that
sets your heart on fire your passion or
whatever you want to call it without
falling into the OR conforming to the
like external pressure to become a
doctor or lawyer like I'm thinking about
the people that are watching this that
have a passion but they don't consider
it to be a job as many people didn't
consider what you you do now to be a job
back then and they're being forced by
the external words parents expectations
social media to go and do something else
they don't want to do what would you say
to those
people I can tell you this that if you
don't have a I didn't realize when I was
nine how unusual it was to be that
passionate that young not until I got to
college half the people my freshman year
didn't yet know what they wanted to
major
in and I said I'm majoring in
astrophysics say was that cuz it was
early in the catalog alphabetically of
things you might major no I've felt this
and known this half my life and so I I
in college I was sensitized to people
who were still looking still
searching well we have the benefit of
longer life expectancy today than 50
years
ago I mention this only because if you
don't know want to be if you don't know
what you want to be when you grow up and
you're 30 that's just fine but I don't
want to have to blame you for not
exposing yourself to what you can be
when you grow up if you're sitting home
watching football and say I don't know
what I want to do with my life why you
do what my parents did visit a new thing
every weekend go on a trip talk to
experts in all manner of tasks and uh
you know visit a chef School visit a uh
a g biology uh Expedition do just do
things and if you like it you'll
probably be better at that than anything
else you choose to do because you you
will invest even your downtime doing it
and as the saying
goes pick something you would do for
free and make that your
career and you'll never live a sad day
in your
life so so that's one variant on pick
something that you
love and all the time when other people
say you know I need a vacation from this
job you you're gonna say vacation what's
that and people say that to me do you
want a vacation from from what from the
astrophysics you're doing but I like
what I'm doing if I'm on vacation on bye
I love being on the beach but if I'm on
the beach I'm thinking about the
universe it's not to get away from the
universe all right not that that could
literally happen anyway
uh so uh that's what I would say you
want to be independent-minded listen to
people's comments people have life
experience don't ignore it but what you
want to do is fold it in to your own
sensibilities provided you have
sensibilities to begin with otherwise
you become this pingpong ball batted
back and forth between one person's
suggestion and
another in the cover of your book um it
talks about the polarization that we're
we're seeing in the world at the moment
what is you know as you what is the what
are the things that you are most
concerned about when you think about the
direction of travel of the human race
and life here on Earth and what's going
on what are the things that trouble you
at a very deep level in terms of our
direction of travel a lot of
things
so let me put this in
context in science if I put a conclusion
forward it's not you're not going to ask
me did you look at both sides of that
no that's not the question it's did you
look at all sides of
it we have this binarity mind where we
think are you form are you for us or
against us is it black or white are you
a boy or you a girl is it up or is it
down this is intellectually lazy because
practically everything that exists in
this universe manifests on a
spectrum so here's a Here's a thought
and you're going to say well did you
look at both no I looked at all sides
did you realize that if this changes
that could change this and did you did
you figure out how sensitive it is to
that if I didn't I'm not doing my job as
a scientist okay so we live in a time
especially fractured by the forces of
social media I say this only because if
you post an opinion on anything in
social
media it gets attacked you there'll be
people who agree with it fine but the
noise and the fireworks are when you get
attacked
I don't think it used to be that way I
think there was a time
when I would Express an opinion and you
say oh that's interesting here's my
opinion so why do you think that way and
here's why I think that that's
interesting I never thought about it
that way cool you you spend 15 minutes
talk com comparing and contrasting
opinions then you go out for a beer at
the
pub this is how I remembered it am I
misremembered I I I don't think
so to you be attacked now what are the
consequences what do you actually after
by attacking someone with a different
opinion oh I know what it is you want
everyone to have exactly the same
opinion you
do well that's not this country
either no you know what's on our
currency on our currency e plur blit
Unum okay out of the many we have
one not out of the one we have
one it is the many it is the plurality
plaus plur it's Latin okay a plurality
means people coexist who think
differently about the world and we
celebrate that or at least we ought to
otherwise we're all the same and we can
make a country where everybody's the
same and that's called a dictatorship is
that really what it really
think through fully the consequences of
that are you let me get back to the
violence part I want to just on the on
the point of social media you had a you
had a tweet that you did that went viral
that got attacked right I mean there
there was one in particular that I think
was was attacked more than the others I
can't even remember off the top of my
head it's never my intent yeah to post a
tweet that gets attacked of course if it
gets attacked it's like I didn't see
that coming I I'm I count myself as an
educator among the ranks of Educators
and my goal is to Enlighten and educate
not to anger people so I still maintain
a forbidden Twitter file yeah on my
computer these are tweets that no I'm
not going to post it even though it's
true objectively true it would be too
upsetting to people is there another way
so anytime that happens like oh my gosh
okay let me see if I can tune that
differently next time but if you know
it's true and you believe it's important
you still might not post it because it
might upset people in ways that are not
productive give me an example no no I I
will quote my father
okay it's not good enough to be
right you also have to be
effective if you're not effective go
home doesn't matter if you are in the
right so if I post something that just
creates
more
divisiveness I need to find another way
to achieve the same goal without the
conflict so no I'm not just about put
the truth out there and if it if it if
it triggers land mind so what it's the
truth no that's not being an educator
I'm really there's a point here I really
want to answer for my for my own
something I've been thinking a lot about
as we see this polarization in every
facet of conversation and public
discourse I've started to think that
maybe the antidote is the very few
amongst us that have the guts to stand
by the truth regardless of the hours
they take and I'm seeing that a little
bit with some big commentators I sh name
names cuz that'll be a headline but um
I'm thinking actually they're like their
their bravery I guess and their courage
to say the truth regardless of the fact
they're going to get piled on because it
doesn't fit the narrative is actually
helping us it's helping us almost
um yeah it's it's helping it moves the
needle a little okay so I I see that I'm
just
saying I believe however delusionally
that you can achieve the same go
without angering
people and part of the goal of that book
is to offer ways to think about points
of conflict in fresh ways that do
not trigger people to dig their heels in
and fight more ferociously to defend
their
opinions now I want to put this in
context because I started out by
describing an idea and you're say did
you consider both sides no I considered
all
sides
um people want to think we're in the
most violent times okay we look at
violence against trans the trans
Community First there was always
violence against trans people nobody was
talking about it because there was
violence against other people there were
violence against black people there was
violence against women there's there's a
whole list of people who were more rep
resented statistically in the world than
trans people where we went through
periods of our social justice Arc to try
to rectify those
problems and
so the fact that trans rights are on the
table
now is itself a measure of
progress because we're not talking about
gay marriage anymore we're not talking
under President Clinton one of our more
more Progressive liberal presidents do
you know what the the the the thing was
it
was gays in the military don't ask don't
tell that was considered a progressive
stance in the 1990s under a liberal
president don't ask don't
tell now in
Qatar with the with they they say we
will welcome uh gay people but don't
exhibit the gayness in the
stands and everyone is jumping all over
them for that regressive
posture it's exactly what we were 30
years
ago don't ask don't tell I don't mind if
you're gay just don't kiss another man
in front of me if you're a man I'm
otherwise okay with it all right so what
I'm saying is
look at the other things that preceded
it and you can declare progress having
led up to it that's my point not that
it's still you don't still have to worry
about it and it still needs Solutions
and you still have to somehow change
people's sense of what equality is and
equal access and opportunity and equity
and inclusion that all still needs to
happen but that is not happening now
or less so with black people so there
are measures of progress that are kind
of
perverse but real and you know what my
father used to say he said I'll know
we've achieved
equality when a black person can be
indicted for embezzlement of
funds when a black person can be sent to
jail for
embezzling $500 million I know we've
made it okay okay like I said it's a
perverse measure but it's it's another
way to think about the progress that has
actually happened in this world all I'm
saying
is we may be living in some of the
safest times there ever was in the
history of
civilization I don't think we should
lose sight of that people are afraid to
say it I think because the worry and
it's an auth an a legitimate worry that
you might just get complacent and sit
back and say see everything is fine it
requires no more work and no more
effort I'm
saying
maybe we should
pick in addition to worrying about the
violence that persists to this day we
should look at the
successes and say well what did we do
right let's do more of that
and there's not much of people saying
look how far we've come let's list how
we achieve this why don't people do that
why don't why AR they I saw a poll on
Twitter two days ago and the question
was do you it was essentially do you
feel optimistic about the future I
clicked yes and I was in the tiny
minority and 78 roughly 70% of people I
think it was slightly more felt
pessimistic about the future I were
worried and fearful about the future
right and there's here's another
statistic which is in the spirit of that
but it's a little more more thorough it
was a Gallop poll one of I forgot which
one it might have been a different one
but one of the official polling agencies
uh for the past 30 years have asked
people each year in the United States um
are things more dangerous for
you just in your community in in your
this year than last
year 27 of those
years people said it's more dangerous
this year than last year I don't feel as
safe as I did last year okay now let's
plot the crime rate over the past 30
years it has been a precipitous
drop just drop there's some bumps in
there but basically it has dropped for
years since the basically the 1980s 90s
up until
today so there's some delusional Force
operating on people's understanding of
the world in which they live and then
people wanted to blame it I think in
part correctly on local
news what's the first thing you see you
put on not the national the local news
um there's a crime committed and now we
have
video you know we didn't used to have
surveillance video now you see the
person beating up on the old person or
the person breaking into the jewelry now
you see it you say oh my
gosh um you know clutch your love your
loved ones and you're valuable
our ability to show you violence is
greater than ever before and it affects
us
emotionally part of what it is to be a
scientist is to figure out all the ways
you could bias yourself and remove them
as far as possible as much as you can
what is the scientific method if not I
give my own wording of the scientific
method it's simply do whatever it
takes to not fool
yourself into thinking something is true
that is not or that something is not
true that
is so I so that poll would have told me
I'm gon to look at the actual data and
I'm gonna look at and and I'm going to
react to the actual data not to my
feelings about an objective truth
nothing wrong with feelings it's the
source of the greatest art in the world
then it's our emotions how we feel for
people but if you're going to make
legislation
if you're going to act on your feelings
and there's an objective truth that
informs those
feelings that's the path you should take
otherwise we're a house of cards that
could collapse at any moment because
somebody feels like you're going to harm
them or they feel like it's dangerous or
they feel like you excuse me I love
human feelings but don't let it
interfere with objective truths don't
let it interfere with legislation laws
that would have to affect us all quick
one from our longest standing sponsor h
i I can't tell you over the last I'd say
over the last really it's been about two
and a half years it was really um post
pandemic how much my health has become
such a huge priority in my life hu has
been probably the most important partner
in my health Journey because I've been
in the boardrooms I've been to their
offices tens and tens and tens and tens
of times I've seen how they make their
decisions on nutrition and that's why
it's s such a wonderful thing to be able
to talk to this audience about a brand
and a product that is so unbelievably
linked to my values and the and the
place I am in my life of valuing the gym
exercise movement my mind my breathing
and all of those things and most
importantly my nutrition that is the
role he he plays and so every time I get
to read these ads out I do it with such
passion because I really really believe
every word I'm saying and I absolutely
love the brand so if you haven't already
tried here and you've been resistant to
my my pestering then give it a go and
let me know how you get on we're lucky
enough to have Intel sponsoring this
podcast and Intel Evo is essentially
their Badge of Excellence that
determines whether a laptop is high-spec
or not so it's going to save you a load
of time researching and comparing models
because if you see the Intel Evo badge
you know it's passed Intel's own strict
requirements for laptops that prioritize
on the-go productivity one of those
requirements for Intel Evo is the real
world battery life and fast charging
when you're in a rush Intel Evo laptops
have long-lasting fast charging
batteries which ticks a lot of boxes for
me you'll get get at least 4 hours worth
of charge in under 30 minutes of being
plugged in and a battery life designed
to last at least nine or more hours even
if you're like me and have multiple tabs
open the laptop is also really
responsive with the Intel Evo platform
it wakes up in less than a second and
comes with 12th generation Intel core
processors built into the laptop so it's
ready to go instantly as someone who
spends a lot of my time out and about
between podcast recordings talks
meetings business meetings events etc
etc being able to rely on a laptop to
keep at the pace I do is critical and
with the Intel Evo platform you get the
performance and battery life you need to
do just that head to intel. co.uk EVO to
find out more about the Intel Evo
platform your documentary Cosmos I don't
know if I'm saying that right Cosmos
Cosmos I think it's a might be an
English you're a Brit I don't know or
care how you pronounce anything it's our
langage so Cosmos Cosmos okay you will
never find an American correcting
British pronunciation happens we just
don't know okay um so objective truth
and and reality and feelings one of the
things I learned from that documentary
which was honestly I I remember the day
I found it I shouldn't say this but I
didn't have a lot of money so I found it
on some like dodgy like pirated website
and I just I watched I think it was
eight episodes
security I watched them all that night
and I and then I went back and watched
the previous one with KL Sean um it just
captivated me and it has ever since I
actually would cite that as my as the
start of my fascination with the
universe and one of the really profound
things I took from it when we're talking
about objective truth and feelings is
there's a scene in in the documentary
where you kind of like zoom out and it
keeps going and going and going and
going and going and going and it made me
talking about objective truth and
feelings it made me feel so
insignificant I realized that I am
objectively irrelevant and that was a
wonderful feeling because with that it
strips away the the burden of your own
self-importance and ego um do we matter
so the cosmic perspective is
incompatible with your ego okay I should
say your ego is incompatible with the
cosmic perspective that's the proper way
to order that sentence the cosmic
perspective shows you how small we are
in size in time in
space and if you go in with a high ego
you might resist that you might say no
I'm important I
but I think of it
differently
the we know one of the greatest Gifts of
modern astrophysics to
civilization dare I call it a
gift is the knowledge that the atoms of
your body are
traceable not only to the Big Bang
origin of the universe itself but
especially two stars that manufacture
captured those elements and later in
their lives on death exploded scattering
that enrichment across gas
clouds so that their next generation of
stars would have planets and on at least
one of those planets
life
so we are not just figuratively we are
literally Stardust
so when you go out and look up at the
night
sky yeah your urge is I'm small and
that's
large and yes you're alive in this
universe but there's another way to look
at
it the universe is alive within
you you have
kinship with the
cosmos
that feeling to me is greater than any
ego you could have possibly walked into
the room with first that feeling borders
on
spiritual second
third we have trained
ourselves to
equate being special with being
different you're special you do
something think some way that no one
else does so I'm
special well let me turn that on a its
head and
say maybe we're
special not because we're different but
because we're the
same all
humans are
Stardust all humans share a chemistry
with all a biology with all other life
on
Earth there's one Genesis on this Earth
we have DNA in you have DNA in common
with a
banana I beg your
pardon you can ask well where are the
arms and legs no DNA goes deeper than
that DNA controls chemistry it controls
metabolism it controls all kinds of
things that are prescribed in the DNA
and that's where we have commonality
with other life forms on
Earth so why not look around and say I'm
not special because I'm a different I'm
special because I'm the same as you as
others as the tree as the brook as the
animals you know the Woodland creatures
and we can all sit here and look up at
the night sky and say yes we have
kinship with the
cosmos I feel large because of that not
small you mentioned the pursuit of
happiness earlier when you're talking
about one of the central sort of like
doctr doctrines of the American dream
that pursuit of of happiness and um in
and in what you've just said about the
Universe I was I was pondering where
meaning is derived from so I kind of ask
the question at the same time this
happiness and meaning where does where
does that come from in in your
perspective what I have found is there's
an urge people
have to search for
meaning is it under this rock behind
metaphorically right is it under a rock
I'm going to search is there meaning
there is it behind a tree
is if if I join this group will that
will be will I find meaning with them if
I and I think okay go ahead but what
you're doing is relegating meaning in
your life to a
search and suppose you don't find
meaning that'd be a force of
disappointment in your life you're
setting yourself up to be
disappointed if you don't find meaning
so H I have another idea
I I use this for myself I may or may not
work for
others I recognized long
ago that in a free Society where I'm not
enslaved and I'm not you know an
indentured servant and I have some
freedom of
choice that I have the power to
manufacture meaning in my
life I can make decisions about my own
life that create the
meaning for
me a meaningful life is learning
something new tomorrow that I didn't
know
yesterday otherwise it's a wasted
day you know the prisoner who who puts
x's in the boxes on the wall for the day
they get out I have that in my head and
the day that I get out is the day I die
all right and what these boxes remind
you of is every day you're alive you're
one day closer to
death so there's one fewer days in there
to accomplish something that you might
have wanted to
accomplish
so I want to keep learning about our
world about each other about things I
don't otherwise know
about
and there are people who only read
things that they agree with or that they
already know about or that it's they're
they're
feeding some herb to
be uh what's the word to be
validated I have books on my
shelf at my
bedside every book is a subject that I
either know nothing about or I
completely disagree with going into the
book I said maybe it'll change my
mind learn new
ideas okay I once presented that list to
the New York Times when they they said
cuz I my book was doing well at one
point and they try to get authors to
talk about other books to keep the the
book Wheel turning because fewer people
are reading today so what books are you
reading so I on your shelf so I listed
the books one of them
was uh a book in it in its 30th printing
or something it was originally written
back in the early 60s I think maybe even
the 50s a book by Barry Goldwater it's
called the conscience of a conservative
and so I'm reading this and people wrote
to me after they saw this listen they
said I didn't know you're closet
conservative I didn't know you're really
a republican did you vote for Trump and
all of a sudden people were presuming
that if I'm reading a book on something
that book must be what my whole life is
about rather than it's a portal to
another place of how people think and
what people do so that shocked me
actually that because that tells me that
most people must have just books that
continue to feed their own interests and
that is the best way to not grow in this
world so one of my measures of meaning
is how much more do I know about the
world tomorrow than I did yesterday
because almost any path you take take
will make you wiser as a person so I
value wisdom that gives meaning to my
life A New Perspective it's not just
knowledge no what is the arc it's it's
there's there's
data data can become
information information on further study
becomes knowledge and after enough time
when you see how the knowledge plugs in
and applies it can become
wisdom wisdom is the distilled essence
of all the
details the wisest statements ever
spoken to
you generally have no detail in them at
all do
they
it's I've heard it said this way wisdom
is what's left over after you've
forgotten all the details it's the
distilled essence of it all so I want to
be wiser on the porch on my rocking
chair I don't want to be the old kudin
in my day we did it best no I don't want
to be that guy no so that's one source
of meaning another and it's directly
traceable to my parents but I'd like to
also think it's traceable to Common
Sense is spend a little bit of your
life lessening the suffering of
others I don't mean redirect your life
some people do they work in soup
kitchens and start not for profits to
Ser yes I I I'm not that person no cuz
my the universe is is what calls me but
in my day in in a week do something that
lessens the suffering of someone else
however trifling that gesture
is
and that's an
infusion
of good yeah I'm value judging it I'm
saying yes it is a good thing to lessen
the suffering of others I'm yeah I'm
declaring that I try not to ever put
opinions out there but it's my opinion
that if you lessen the suffering of
others you make a better
world and don't we all want to live in a
better
world if your happiness were a recipe
right consisting of various ingredients
that needed to be present in certain
quantities for you to be a happy person
and under the assumption that you know
no one is perfectly happy under any kind
of vague sense of the word what what is
missing from your list of ingredients at
the
moment or what could you have more of
that would make I don't think of life
that way okay how do you think of Life
how why is that wrong that question I
didn't say it was wrong I don't value
judge okay it's not what's right or
wrong here it's it's
um I don't live life that way
because it means you carry with you the
emotions I could be happier if I were
doing this and how come I'm not and all
of a sudden well then I must be
miserable if I'm not as happy as I could
be no I don't measure dayto day am I
happy or
not I I it's not the
measure yes it it's in there but that's
not the metric the metric is am I
successful at what at what I'm
doing am I no no
it's not even that it's am I as good at
this as I can
be if you're not going to try to improve
go home find something
else so I remember in my first interview
on National
Television a new planet had just been
discovered around another star an exop
Planet it was Banner headlines 5,000 in
the catalog but back then
1995 it was Banner headline another
planet and we kind of always knew they'd
be out there we just didn't have the
tools to figure it out uh NBC News sent
an action cam up to the Planetarium I
was freshly appointed as director they
didn't know me as a person but I carried
title and so the Chiron on the TV image
gets to say Neil grass Tyson director
Aiden planetarium okay they came up and
interviewed me tell us about this new
planet how was it discovered right so I
gave my best professorial
reply best oh my gosh it was there's a
Doppler shift the the orbiting planet um
influences the position of the star in
space it's not just the star sits there
fixed in the universe and planets orbit
it they both orbit their common center
of gravity and so the St you can't see
the planet it's too dim but you look at
the star and the star is jiggling back
and forth and I motion that with my body
and I said and you measure this movement
back and forth with the Doppler shift
you calculate it and you can infer the
existence of this planet and B Bing it's
a planet and I went on I went on for
like probably four times that length
with my Pro and then I go home it's
national news I get to call everybody
hey everybody my friends in California
I'll could be on TV check it out and so
when the segment
aired all they showed was me jiggling my
hips like this
and say it's a planet and I said
oh they don't want my professor reply
they want a reply that fits in their
medium a soundbite
medium so let me practice that so I went
home and stared in the mirror and had
people just shout out objects names
places people things and I assembled
sound bites for each one of them it's
like three sentences it's got to be
informative makes you smile a little bit
and the information has to be tasty so
that you want to tell someone else
that's a sound bite okay we could do
that now mention anything in the
universe just just not a question just a
word just anything Mars Mars o do you
know Mars is red because it's rust it's
a rusted planet and rust has the color
of red the whole planet because there's
a lot of iron on Mars and red is the
color of
blood hence Mars the God of
War it might have life there we're still
looking bum sound bite Venus okay Venus
the goddess of love and beauty and Venus
as an object in the night sky is Stupify
andly
brilliant until you learn it's has a
runaway greenhouse effect and it's 900
degrees Fahrenheit 500 degrees Celsius
on its surface it would vaporize you so
much for the love and beauty and Venus
so it's it's the least explored Planet
because of how hostile it is to our
space probes boom we got this I'm not
giving you a 10-minute lecture on the
thermodynamics of Venus so my point is
when I saw that what I did did not serve
the
needs I invested a lot of energy
so that I could be exactly what they
needed so that their task is simplified
and I be get better at something that
could serve a greater good I'm not I
don't want to say that's happiness I'm
going to say that's
fulfillment of an objective where I
improved in what it is I was doing I
have to say when I knew I was going to
meet you this question which was so
front of mind for me is there is so many
people that talk about the stars in the
universe but there's only one you and
what I mean by that is yeah I don't know
what you mean by that what what so would
I have had anyone else on this podcast
that talks about the stars in the
universe no the reason why you are a
dream guest is because you create a
bridge through exactly what you've
described making it engaging and
interesting
and uh fun and exciting because of the
way that you communicate and like people
don't often think about this whether
they're computer programmers or they are
archaeologist or whatever that it's
great to know stuff but like I think
Ricky Javas makes the joke with a daddy
longlegs where he says you can have all
the venom in the world but if you don't
have the the teeth to inject the Venom
if you don't have the skill of like
communication and storytelling and
engagement the Venom is pointless so
what I will say is uh I will give one
other example and I'll tie a bow on
it uh the first time I was invited to
appear on The Daily Show which a very
popular ComEd
news program in the United States uh
hosted by um John Stewart John Stewart
is a comedian he's brilliant he's very
into current events we will know him
he's sharp and I've seen politicians get
interviewed by him and they want to
deliver their stump speech and they're
deer in the headlights because he's just
dancing circles around them and on my
first interview I said I am not going to
be the deer in the Headlights okay so I
studied his show with a stopwatch and I
said how many seconds does he on average
does he give his guests to speak before
he comedically interrupts them okay
write that down it was anywhere between
9 and 12 seconds which doesn't sound
like much but it's it it works
comedically all right then I said how
far back in time does he reference a
current event to put in a joke that he
might give because you can't go too far
back cuz no one remembers it the joke
has to work without you reminding people
what they're supposed to know so very
intensely the the previous day little
less the second day by the time the
third day in the past there's hardly any
reference to it okay so I studied the
last two or three days of current events
I practiced my sound bites even more to
fit them into this time frame and I get
on the show and I deliver the lines that
mean the sound bites oh but I come
preloaded with anything he could
possibly ask me so I'm like I'm
I'm I I waddle into the studio with a
utility belts worth of thoughts and
ideas that he could be asking me
okay so I'm there and if you see me on
these shows I'm a little manic because
the it's coursing through me all this
knowledge and information that I need a
response to just in case he asks me so
we do this and I get the point of and he
makes the comedic point and now my
thought is not dangling in the middle of
a joke because I completed the thought
the joke tightens that up and then we
move on right so we go through this
whole interview and he mentions the
current event and I have a little sound
B thing about that after the interview
people come up to me you know what they
said they said
Neil you're such a natural and you have
such good chemistry with John Stewart
my they have no
idea how much time I
invested to look
natural pardon my expl of there but we
swear all the time
yeah what I'm saying
is I wanted to be as good as I possibly
could have been in that
interview knowing his audience because
each host has their own audience you
want to serve Their audience I don't
want to just give the stump speech so
everything that I imagined for myself
was for for him and his audience I would
communicate differently on a different
talk daytime talk shows are different
than the evening comedic news uh on a
documentary it's different so my only
point of this with these examples
are I pay attention to whether people
are paying attention to me if I'm giving
you an explanation and you're drifting
all that's not working let me pull that
out of the utility belt let me try
something else uh if I talk about black
holes in a particular way oh you're
leaning in in the conversation and your
eyebrows are r that that
worked so I have a
database of people's
Expressions while I'm talking to
them and I sift that yeah so that I pick
and choose what is most impactful in the
few minutes we have together otherwise
I'm dragging you through a syllabus that
who the hell cares what if the devices
that you you probably don't do even do
it
intent you're saying it's
natural I didn't say I can edit out you
know don't edit that out don't edit that
out okay okay so what are the what are
the devices that you intentionally work
very very hard on to imploy that that I
might take from you and become a as good
a speaker as you are as engaging and as
like captivating despite the fact that
you're delivering such complex subject
matter at times but it still seems
accessible to someone like me that is
just just simply a a chimp not
everything that excites me as a
professional in the field will excite
you you need to know you need to sort
them into those
categories and maybe there's something
that will excite me and you'll see me
get all excited and you'll get giddy
because you like watching me get excited
that's a different dynamic in that
moment M all right it is kind of fun I
like watching uh you know I have a
colleague who's like all into leeches
right he specializes in invertebrates
and leeches among them just to hear him
talk about I I don't care about leeches
but he does it's like wow I didn't know
anyone could care that much about a
blood sucking invertebrate but it was
just I'm delighted to watch that all
right but so you sort things that excite
you from things that could excite
someone else well how do you know you
have to practice that okay uh strike up
conversations watch if people
care about what you say is there some
other conversation that distracts them
from your conversation with them well go
back to the drawing board on that one
okay and I also be a good listener watch
what excites other people when they're
in conversations with other people and
that's what I've done so in that way I'm
I'm fully socialized my parents were
social creatures and we held dinner
parties often uh hosting conversations
and I'd watch that uh I'm I'm a kid so
I'm not for their dinner parties I
didn't have a seat at the table but um
the idea of being able to communicate
and my father's a sociologist that's all
he ever did uh that I think mattered
within
me and you have to be able to read
people's facial you know what we did
with my
kids uh it was first evidence that they
were not autistic but also I think it's
good practice get a when they're old
enough to start thinking about human
emotion maybe 8 n early the TW years
between 8 and
12 where they can actively think about
what someone else thinks and feels
okay is the person angry is the person
happy is they sad are they jealous or
they whatever okay so what I did was or
what you can do is find a romantic
comedy that is well
acted all right where where you have
stars that really do it right and sit
down and watch the movie with the sound
off and have your
kids ask them what do you think they're
thinking now what do you think
she's feeling what do you think she's
saying what do you think she's going to
do next and you just watch it and the
actors are not only delivering lines
they're
feeling their roles and you might have
to wait if your kid is a little slower
that way maybe they have to be 13 or 14
Middle School where your social standing
begins matters more than in elementary
school you're not even you don't even
care right so maybe it's a middle school
thing more than an elementary school
thing and that way you can say you
thought she said well let's check and
you go back and it turns out yes she was
jealous in that moment and so it trains
you to read a facial expression and a
good actor will do this that's what
makes them good actors and and you don't
rely on the sound just the visual and
it's an exercise in Reading faces
reading people reading
emotions and so you want to do this and
in the limit you become become in full
up empath right I think that's a noun
yeah uh an
empath uh that has shaped some people's
careers this is real we're human we're
social creatures so yeah I fold that
in because I want to reach
you oh and what things do you care about
in my podcast it's called star
talk I have a co-host who's a comedian a
professional stand-up
comedian and the anatomy of the podcast
is there's sort of the Trinity there's
the science content there's the humor
and is pop
culture why do I care about pop culture
because you walk into the room already
framed in a scaffold of Pop
Culture if I know that in advance I
don't have to start from scratch when
I'm teaching you something I'm going to
say oh I have a bit of science that I
can clad onto this part of your scaffold
your pop culture scaffold and you know
something it fits it sticks and you say
whoa I never knew that about
this there's an American football game
that ended in a tie and but we don't end
in ties right so there's an
overtime and you reach a point where
it's sudden death overtime sudden death
where the next person that scores wins
the game so this person was was ready to
kick for a it's called a field goal and
it's 50 yards out 50 yards oh my gosh
okay that's hard so they kick it and no
one breathes for the 3 or 4 seconds the
ball is so the ball tumbles in the air
and there it goes and everybody just
follows it and look it up and the ball
hit the left
upright and kened in for the win and I
said whoa wait a minute what's the
orientation of this Stadium it's north
south this is a round ball hitting a
round post
and going in do you realize round things
hitting other round
things fractions of an inch make a
difference so I did a fast calculation
and then I
tweeted the Cincinnati Bengals for
the for the sudden death field
goal was that kened off the upright was
aided by a 1
cm shift to the
right given to it by the rotation of the
earth people lost their minds okay
people okay the the Cincinnati Bengals
where the local newspaper said God help
them win the
game and so everybody so I didn't have
to say what football is who the
Cincinnati Bengals are what a sudden
death goal is what a field goal is is or
explain that the goalposts have a left
and a right goalpost I didn't have to
introduce any of that that's an example
of the pop culture that someone walks
into the room with and I found a bit of
science that I know they're going to
care about because it touches something
that's pop culture that they already
care
about and I would follow that up with
it's a coriolis force and it's why
storms rotate clockwise counterclockwise
in the northern hem I'd followed up with
the lesson plan but I got your interest
yeah okay yeah I didn't start out that
way there's such a thing as a Corola for
no no go where they care go where they
care that's and that's what I do
professionally if I spoke to Alice and I
said your wife and I said Alice what
does Neil struggle with what would she
say to me struggle with oh um personally
well I I don't know entirely um but I
know I like to eat more than I like to
exercise and I used to be very high high
highly tuned athlete so I remember what
it was like to be in complete shape I I
remember I also used to dance so I could
could do a full split I was doing you
know I could I was like totally in shape
so I have that memory which in a way is
worse than never having been in shape so
she'll say I wouldn't call it struggling
but I would say she would say that
um I need to car more time to exercise
just to stay healthy I think is so that
that's one of them uh another thing we
we talk a lot we've been married 34
years and you say what's the secret you
know anytime someone asks you what the
secret is they're
being
lazy because it assumes just know this
one thing and everything will be
better how much of life actually works
that way
when someone said what's your secret to
knowing astrophysic it's like you know
working at it 60 hours a week that's the
secret somebody asks a chef what's your
secret in this recipe it's because I
went to Chef school for six years that's
the secret so I've never asked someone
what's your secret because I that's
disrespect for the actual work that
could go into what it is to gain the
expertise or the state of existence that
someone has
achieved um I think in a marriage it's
uh you know most or half end in divorce
within some number of years so uh what's
what's going on with the institution and
I think we're not
trained how to
communicate you're living with a person
every day of your life it's really easy
to take that person for granted it's
really easy to to uh to enter states of
boredom because you've already talked
about so what you
do you do new things with each other as
often as you can you go on a trip
explore new hobbies you go you know you
take up a a new sport you play tennis or
whatever just do something new as you
would with any other new person right
why does the other new person look
really good because they're new
okay so you could you can always be new
in your marriage if you do new things
why not travel travel together then
every day is a new experience you both
share so when you get back home you have
something new to talk about new to share
new to places to grow and this thing
where I want to go on a dating app where
I can find someone who's just like
me I don't want anyone just like me I
already have me I want someone different
I want someone I can learn from someone
with different interests that I could
grow
into so nothing that I've ever used a
dating app but if I had a dating app uh
that's I would look for someone who is
just really different and it's odd
because so many of the apps are finding
someone just like you all right there's
now like a Christian app and a Jewish
app and a this app and a and a find
someone who has this category it's like
wow
w why not just have some fun with
somebody who's just different one of the
themes we talk about a lot in this
podcast is mental health and the the
conversation around mental health is is
really developed over the last 10 years
from a time when we didn't completely oh
my gosh yeah it's a it's the the
perception of it has completely changed
in terms of being destigmatized but then
our awareness and our understanding of
concept of physical health and mental
health is now more present than ever was
there an event that put your mental
health in focus for your for you like
really made you cognizant of the fact
that you have mental health and it's
something that you have
to I was going to say Protect but just
yeah keep healthy I guess it often you
know okay I don't have a simple I have
an answer but it's not simple how much
time you got left here couple
minutes um there's a friend I told you
it's a long story but you asked
it there was someone my age maybe one
year older
when I was in high school who died who
was the son of a very close family
friend of my
parents we might have played together as
very small children but I didn't know
him as a teenager
okay he died of brain cancer get very
tragic you're 17 years old and you die
of brain cancer ready to go off to
college and all the rest they bust
in school kids from the
school okay
and they unloaded and they filled this
chapel and there's a closed casket
because it was it was brain cancer so
you know and there's a picture of them
on the
casket and I'm watching
this
and the you know the his classmates are
like holding each other as they walk up
the aisle
and there's the organ plane
no it's not a New Orleans song where you
sort of celebrate the life of the person
who just died it was the kind of organ
music where you want to be sad that the
person
died and I'm watching this then I start
getting emotional and like a tear shows
up in my eye and I said wait a minute I
don't know this kid I don't even
remember
him I'd be crying
because the organ is making me cry I'd
be crying because I'm seeing other
people who did know him cry and I did a
fast calculation how many people are
dying in this hour in the city or in the
country or in the world am I crying for
them who I equally don't
know I
rationalized an emotional state out of
the this this pain and misery and I said
if I'm not tearing for everybody else
who dies who I don't know I should not
be tearing for this person and so I
sucked the tears back up and just
observed it anthropologically that
there's a funeral going on right in
front of
me that
was an
expression of control over my
emotions that is basically
how I lived for the
first 19 years of my life what was the
cost the cost no cost why would there be
a cost why should there be a cost to not
having forced emotions by other to to to
no
there's what cost I'm I'm a geek kid
okay and emotions are something that
interfere with rational thought
but this changed so what I can say to
you is you're emotional what's the cost
for not being rational okay I could
totally put the question back on you
what's the C you slammed the door you
hung up the phone back when we had
phones to hung up you slammed it down
you cried when you didn't even know the
person okay that's your
cost so we we maybe we're simply
different people I'm not saying they
shouldn't have cried they knew them of
course they're going to cry I didn't
organist stop making me cry and so I
didn't okay
so how did that
change my freshman year college it all
changed it all
changed first
semester I take a class in Art and
Design they play music and they say draw
the music
and it's
like I don't know what you're talking
about what do you feel the music and
draw how it makes you feel I say it's
just music I'm listening to I'm like a
it's like two ships passing in the night
I don't know what the hell this person
is talking about I don't know what he
means I don't know you know should I
still stay in this class what is it a
waste of time what's going on here and
he says here's what you do draw the
energy
in the
music and excuse me I like I'm a
physicist right energy is equals mc
squared there's kinetic energy there's
mechanical energy there's chemical
energy energy is not what you draw out
of
music okay
okay so I said all right I don't know
what he's saying but I'll try something
and then he criticizes it okay so I
don't know what the hell I'm doing why
am I in this should I drop the class
okay then they roll in the pumpkins they
they draw the pumpkins okay now I can I
can do this it's it's it's a task
there's a pumpkin in front of me I'm
going to draw it so I draw
pumpkins and takes me a few tries to get
the hang of it but I'm I'm one of the
world's best pumpkin drawers to this day
because of that we spent weeks drawing
pumpkins and they're also are leaning on
each other and they have these sort of
seams in them and the not all of them
have the same size handle the neck that
comes out and there some have bruises
and there's like 30 of them up in the
front of so I'm drawing
them I said okay uh is this is this all
we're going to do with this
okay after pumpkins became the entire
meaning of my life for two or three
weeks we returned to the studio the
pumpkins are still there and then they
said
now draw dra the space between the
pumpkins and I just
snapped it was like wait a minute you're
telling me that I give object and
meaning objective meaning to these
things that we call
pumpkins and
now these pumpkins are just the
boundaries to something else that I'm
giving meaning to and that's the space
between the pumpkins and it was like
[Music]
whoa
so I started drawing the space between
the
pumpkins and the pumpkins were now the
edges of things not the object of what
I'm
drawing and my
brain turned inside
out and I started looking looking around
I say are these lights or is it a shadow
that makes the shape am I in a
space is the space what's real or is it
the boundary of the space if the
boundary weren't there would I still be
in this space I still be breathing this
air but we wouldn't call it a space
because that boundary isn't there so the
B so my I everything looked different
after
then everything
and from that moment onward I could talk
to
artists with abstract
vocabulary how does this painting feel
what does it do for you what do what are
your what are your emotions it's it it
it opened up a
box an emotional state that was
previously
non-communicative with the rest of my
mind it was kept there I could act it's
not that I didn't know how to cry it's
just that the crying had nothing to do
with anything else that was objectively
real so what they did it it it found the
place where it pride it open and there
was spillage there was cross
spillage so I can tell you this now
there's no way this sentence could have
come out of my head on my iPhone I have
skin it's not a casing it's just it's
called a skin and it is a section of Van
Go's star night the actual name of the
painting is the star night okay and it's
got these swirly beautiful colors and
all right it's my favorite
painting
why because it's certainly not what he
saw the sky has never looked this
way but it's definitely what he felt
and for me an artist's task their Duty
in this world not to prescribe about
this but for me their duty is to show me
the
world as I do not see
it take me someplace give me a
perspective that will broaden my
interpretation of
reality that is a thought an idea a
sentence that could have never come out
of my mouth until that moment where I
drew the space between the
pumpkins and that access to abstract
thinking to now in the early days I'd
watch a Broadway musical and two people
walk up to each other speaking uhoh a
song is about to happen and then they
sing about their love for each other I
say why don't you just cut the song just
say you love each other move on to the
next scene that's how I felt as a
child after college after that course
I see the two people walk up to each
other and they're speaking their
emotions and I'm saying you
know when you sing your emotions it
reaches a deeper part not only within
yourself but within the listeners
because there's more of your emotion
expressed when you
sing and so now I
long for the song in a Broadway musical
the Simplicity of expressed
emotion so I don't want to quite say I'm
the opposite of what I was when I suck
back the tears in that
funeral but I'm going to say
that dare I suggest a welldeveloped
access to both your emotions and your
rational self with some control over the
two you don't want rampant contamination
but just be able to close the door every
now and then between the two and then
open it uh I think can serve us greatly
as a civilization if I were to
offer perspective and advice there are
times where you need your rational self
otherwise you will not make a decision
that's in the best interest of your
health your wealth or your
security but don't let that hide what
emotions you might have because the
world's greatest art as as far as I can
tell issues forth from rampant emotion
that we're capable of as human
beings Neil thank you we have um a
closing tradition on this podcast where
the last guest asks a question for the
next guest without knowing who they're
going to ask it for and they write it in
this book and I don't get to see it till
I open it which is fun for me but you
get to see it now I get to see it now
okay Jack Jack always looks but I never
look when was the last time you cried
and why
uh I cry
often now that the door to my emotions
has been found
and pride open so I cry often I cry at
very simple things I cry at at simple
emotional moments in in in a play uh
resident of New York city so we consume
as many londoners surely consume the
theater scene um I'll cry even in a
moment in a musical when musical is
supposed to make you happy but there
might be a tender moment I tear up if I
see acts
of
um sensitivity and
kindness in a situation where you would
not expect
it okay if you see a War torn scene and
a
soldier picks up a doll and hands it to
child there's
a a soldier
who's brandishing a weapon for killing
people and they take a moment to do that
I'll tear up I'm tearing up now just
thinking of such a scene when that
happens so I tear up
in unexpected acts of
kindness cuz
it's hope for the
world I'll tear up in a movie uh usually
in a theater because it's a big
immersive experience less so at home on
a TV even the same movie I might feel it
a little more in a theater immersiveness
matters because it's it's coming at you
for more in more ways with with greater
strength the sound is greater the visual
effects are greater uh you're there as a
participant in the film so um so I I
probably will tear up once or twice a
week uh for those reasons and more but
those are the more common sort of
reasons that
[Music]
arise Neil thank you thank you for the
inspiration over the last decade thank
you for um being the Star Messenger in
my life which is the name of your new
book because you uh it's funny I was I
was was thinking about it as as we
started this conversation that that was
actually the moment that I became
obsessed with the universe when I first
watched you present Cosmos all those
years ago um and this book is just a
continuation of that but it's a very
current book in the sense that it speaks
to some of the profound issues that are
happening in the world the inside cover
I think presents a really great
explanation of that in a time when our
political and cultural views feel more
polarized than ever Tyson provides a
much needed antidote to so much of what
divides us while making a passionate
case for the twin char of Enlightenment
a cosmic
perspective and the rationality of
Science and that's exactly what this
book is it's a necessary antidote to the
modern times we're living in well thank
you for your support of that I will say
that Star Messenger comes from Galileo
where he first perfects the telescope
after only just having heard that the
telescope was invented in the
Netherlands he said oh my gosh that's do
let me make my own version of it he
makes the best version that exists in
the world observes the night SK
notices that Venus goes through phases
which can only happen if Venus is going
around the Sun and not around Earth uh
it could he notices that the sun has
spots the moon has craters the Jupiter
has moons that orbit it he didn't call
them moons they were called Jupiter
stars because why would you think they
were moons who knows and he reports this
with the first evidence that Earth is
not the center of all motion and he
called it siderius
nunus Starry Messenger Meer the Star
Messenger wasn't him the Star Messenger
was these Messengers themselves from the
sky that are conflicting with prevailing
belief systems about humans and about
Earth and he got into big trouble with
the
church so what I as an astrophysicist I
found all the starry messages I could
and applied them to our plight here on
Earth and that's the summary of what's
going on in that book death is a topic
you mention in this book yes life and
death life and I'm more compelled by
death as should we all
be yeah I I was a Christian growing up
until the age of about 18 and then when
I discovered atheism or agnosticism or
whatever they want to call it my
perspective of death changed I actually
became really comfortable with death the
prospect of death where do you think and
where are you at in your perspective and
thoughts on
death for myself or just in general in
general and s probably quite Inseparable
I imagine I don't know
death uh it it death comes up as a as a
topic of
conversation commonly when we talk about
prolonging
life and now that we're into the genome
and into human physiology might there be
a day where you can live
forever okay and there's something
called The Generation that will have
escape velocity do you know what that is
is okay I'll tell you what it is so in
the last 50
years we've increased life expectancy 20
years in the last 10 years we've
increased life expectancy by five
years so there will be a time where in
the last year we increased like
expectancy by a
year at that moment Homo sapiens have
achieved escape velocity from
Death okay that generation will never
die unless you're hit by a bus
okay so that brings to you the question
if you could live
forever would
you and my reply to that and I don't
want to answer for other people so this
is my I want to be very clear that yes I
have my opinions but I don't care if you
share my opinions you should have your
own opinions okay my Outlook on this
is let's take for example a bouquet of
flowers if you buy a bouquet of flowers
and hand them to your loved one and the
bouquet the flowers are made of
plastic how would your loved one reply
to that they they probably think you
don't love them but you say but darling
they'll last forever
okay no that's not the variable here
that's not what
matters the fact that flowers
die is the very reason why they have
meaning as a
gift your handed flowers They're going
to be dead in seven days that means you
know you better pay attention to them
you're going to smell them you're going
to take care of them you're going to
make sure you change the water and trim
the stems and you're going to put it in
a central place so that not only you see
them but so does everybody
else you're going to celebrate those
flowers while they are
alive because the day is going to come
very quickly where they're going to die
and in their sence you're going to nurse
them
through as the neck gets a little weak
on the stem you might try to prop them
up until they're gone
it is the fact that they're going to die
that gives them meaning as a
gift and dare I say that my knowledge
that I'm gonna
die gives not only
meaning to my being
alive it gives urgency to it on my
deathbed I do not want to regret
having the interest and ability to have
solved the problem that I did not
solve to have an experience that I could
have had but then I did
not knowing I'm going to die means I'm
going to wake up in the
morning and I'm going to be all about
action
action I it's I tell people I love them
if I love them I will accomplish thing I
will learn this thing I wanted to learn
I will do all I
can because you know what I want on my
Tombstone it's a quote from a famous
American educator of two centuries ago
his name is Harris
man who's also a university president I
think it was he gave a commencement
speech one of his
last and he says to the graduates I
beseech you love that word nobody uses
that word anymore
beseech Shakespeare loved it I beseech
you to treasure up in your hearts these
my parting
words be ashamed to die until you have
scored some victory for
Humanity I want that on my Tombstone I
don't want any other Monument but that
on my tombstone
if everyone lived to that
goal how different the world would be
how enriched it would be with people's
energy to improve the lot not only of
others as individuals but of your
neighborhood your
Society civilization
itself so that's what I think of when I
think of death
by the
way in there I referen
dogs there's a dog over there for anyone
there's a dog over there called Leica in
the corner of this room Leica where have
I heard that name
Leica 65 years ago Leica orbits
Earth the first dog to orbit Earth uh
the first animal to orbit Earth then
there's some guinea pigs and then there
were some um
chimps and then Yuri Gagarin orbits the
earth the first human I think he was
this seventh mammal to orbit the earth I
had to check my notes on this but it was
uh if you add up mammals we humans were
very late in the in the space
achievement
scale
so when you come home for having been
away if you own a dog you will know
exactly what I'm describing by the way
this does not happen with cats so with
the dog the dog is happy to see you not
just happy hey glad you're home it's
they jump up and down and they want to
lick your face and they want to jump
into your lap if it's a lap dog and if
it's a if it's an Irish wolf hound
they'll want to knock you over and lick
you in the face they're
excited by you first I would ask did you
do anything that day that deserved that
praise so one famous quote is be the
person the your dog thinks you
are okay that's a high bar let me
say but there's the and by the way if
you go out to just check the mail and
come back the dog is happy to see
you so now wait a minute well
why uh let me just make up a reason okay
I'm just pulling this out of my ass you
ready
okay uh dogs don't live as long as we
do the famous dog year calculation
there's some nuances to it but the blunt
calculation is one dog year is seven
human years
okay so when a dog is 10 they're like
70 all right when a dog is 12 they're 84
they're getting ready to die okay dogs
die between age basically 12 and 16 okay
all
right wait a minute if it's a factor of
seven
difference it
means we live an entire week of Our
Lives for every single day a dog
lives so maybe the dog
knows it won't live as long as we will
maybe it
knows it's got a truncated life
expectancy relative to humans maybe it
knows it's got to make everyday
count we could languish away five days
out of the week you still have the other
two days to watch football with your
friends the dog doesn't have that
luxury so I'm making this up I'm going
to declare that dogs know that every day
of their lives matter and therefore
they're going to make it count and
they're going to be happy every day you
ever wake up to a dog that's depressed
never uh
no you know I'll walk myself today don't
worry about it I'll feed I don't want to
e no they've been sick all right that's
how you know they're sick they're not
licking you in the face that's a sad day
for the dog but then they pop back dogs
don't stay sick for long because they
live seven times faster than we do have
you ever taken a dog to the vet and they
perform surgery on the
dog
okay you know where I'm going here they
perform surgery the next day the dog is
out running around in the park I've seen
dog with the leg
amputated amputated leg and the next day
they're a little slower but they're kind
of walking around and they still want to
lick you in the face and there's good as
new after 3 days if we had one of our
legs amputated oh my gosh I'm still in
the hospital a month
later dogs live in the fast
lane and maybe they know
it and so I want to think to
myself no I'm not licking people in the
face but I want to experience the joy
and the urgency that dogs do simply by
being
alive Neil thank you thank you for the
generosity of your time thank you for
all the inspiration thank you for uh
schooling me in the most um uh
unintentional way on how to be a
wonderful engaging communicator and how
to make very complex subject matter fun
and accessible for every bit well thank
you and can I end with the beginning
quote of the book please may I at the
beginning of the book I wanted to set
the
mood because Earth from space is very
different than Earth Earth from Earth's
surface oh dedicated to the memory of
siril degrass Tyson and all others who
want to see the world as it could be
rather than as it
is that was my father okay so here's the
quote Apollo
astronaut Edgar Mitchell Apollo 14 he
went to the moon and saw Earth cuz kind
of what happened we went to the moon to
discover the moon to explore the moon
and we look back over our shoulders and
we kind of discovered Earth for the
first
time the birth of the
modern conservation and environmental
movement began while we were walking on
the moon because there was Earth a drift
alone in the darkness of
space with no hint that help would come
from elsewhere to save us from ourselves
it's a that very line is in uh Carl Sean
penned in his book a pale blue dot so
here's Edgar
Mitchell you develop an instant Global
Consciousness a people orientation an
intense dissatisfaction with the state
of the world and a compulsion to do
something about it from out there on the
moon International politics looks so
petty you want to grab a politician by
the Scruff of the neck and drag him a
quar million miles out and say look at
that you son of a
[Music]
we're
done quick word from one of our sponsors
I've got a tip for all of you that will
make your virtual meeting experiences I
think 10 times better as some of you may
know by now Blue Jeans by Verizon offers
seamless high quality video conferencing
but the reason why I use blue jeans
versus other video conferencing tools is
because of immersion their tools make
you feel more connected to the employees
or customers you're trying to engage
with and now they're launching one of
their biggest feature enhancements to
impact virtual events so far called Blue
Jean Studio I actually used it the other
day I did a virtual event using the
studio which I think about 700 of you
came to TV level production quality all
done by one person with very little
technical experience on a laptop so if
you've got an event coming up and you're
thinking about doing it virtually check
out blue jean studio now let me know
what you think because I genuinely
believe I know this is an advert and I'm
supposed to say this but I genuinely
believe it's the best tool I've seen for
doing really immersive simple but high
quality production virtual events quick
one as you might know crafted are one of
the sponsors of this podcast and crafted
are a jewelry brand and they make really
meaningful pieces of jewelry I think
I've worn this piece for almost a year
it hasn't broken hasn't changed color
cuz it's really really good quality and
it costs roughly 50 Quid I'm not the
type of person that has Rolexes or
jewelry that cost tens of thousands of
pounds I want pieces that are reliable
that look beautiful and that hold
meaning and significance for me and
that's exactly why I've War crafted for
so long and when we had the conversation
about them sponsoring this podcast I was
so unbelievably Keen for them to do so
check it out if you're a guy crafted
london.com and yeah if you get any
pieces of crafted tagman let me know
what you think
[Music]
ah